welcome to the 2008 podcast edition of
times talks the New York Times speakers
series each times talk event features
New York Times journalists in compelling
conversations with today's top thinkers
and talents to learn more about the
Times Talk series and to see a list of
current times talks events please visit
our website at times talks calm good
afternoon everyone
I am Elise Myers of The New York Times
welcome to our third annual Sunday with
the magazine the first in our new home
at the time Center every Sunday the
editors and writers of the New York
Times Magazine examined the way we live
now today we are delighted to bring you
the magazine live in conversations that
explore everything from what we eat to
what we wear to the focus of this
conversation what we believe our guests
are three of today's most eminent
writers on the subject of religion and
its role in politics in best-selling
books and magazine articles they have
explored thought-provoking questions
such as what led the u.s. to favor
Sunnis over Shiites in Iraq whether
North Korea went awry because of
Confucianism not communism and why Jews
and Muslims diverge in their views of
Sharia we are grateful that they've
joined us in the time center this
afternoon as well as in a live webcast
for those who are unable to be with us
you will hear much more that our guest
from our moderator a respected
journalist who was one of the many
reasons why these times demand the times
he joined the magazine in 1998 as a
contributing writer and quickly became
known for cover stories that people read
on Sunday and talk about all week long a
native New Yorker he has covered
everything from city politics and food
to sports and diplomacy in recent years
he has traveled the world from Haiti to
Iraq and the Congo to Kosovo to cover
some of the most important stories for
the magazine his most recent cover story
last month explored the growing
interconnection between celebrities and
philanthropy his many fans are looking
forward to his next book coming this
fall the freedom agenda why America
spread democracy just not like George
Bush did please join me in welcoming our
moderator James trout and our special
guests Noah Feldman Christopher Hitchens
and Marco Lilla well I'm delighted to
have everybody here it's a very large
crowd and I think you realize you can't
go wrong with these three gentlemen who
were sitting to my left I'm going to
essentially play the hockey referee I'm
going to drop the puck and skate out of
the way and I think also we may not
necessarily stick to the religion in
American politics subject so I want all
of you guys also to feel free to speak
as well about broader subjects like
religion in the Middle East but I want
it I want to start off though by posing
the question why there is so much more
religion in American political life why
it is so much more immersed in in
religious language and religious tests
than was true let's say 30 or 40 years
ago that is is that because we're in the
middle of some kind of third great great
wave of religiosity and this is simply
an inevitable consequence of that is
that because politicians have figured
out how to exploit religious feeling in
a way that wasn't true before or is
there yet some other reason so let me
just start by asking you that question
no because you've actually written about
that and then the others please feel
free to go ahead and jump in I think it
took at least two of the factors that
you mentioned first there had to
actually be a rise in people's feeling
for evangelical religion evangelical
Christianity in the United States and I
think that did happen in the really in
the later 60s in the 1970s but that
wasn't enough for it to enter a
political discourse I think what it took
for that to happen was for a coordinated
group of people to realize that
evangelical Christians could be
organized into a relatively effective or
not always consistent political force
and that means specifically on the right
yes and I think that you know that
begins in earnest with the moral
majority which is a great phrase moral
majority you know they
Dixon sprays silent majority and
transformed it cleverly into moral
majority and then really sustain itself
through the 1980s peaking in the 90s
with the Christian Coalition and I think
that the idea that you could have an
effective political organization to this
effect also benefited tremendously from
a sort of sense of political backlash to
things like the Supreme Court's decision
in Roe against Wade to make abortion
legal notwithstanding what states might
might think about it so I think it took
both and politics is experimental you're
you experiment to see if you can get
people with a certain set of beliefs to
jump on board a movement and if you can
that's a reason to keep on trying and it
becomes self-sustaining as you learn to
raise funds and send out direct mailings
and be more effective Chris de Burgh is
that you're saying I think I would I
would only rephrase what Noah said and
put it like this that it comes from the
identification of secularism with
liberalism particularly with feminism
that would be that's what it's a
reaction to in foreign policy as well as
in domestic and in other matters such as
the the two that never go away obviously
our abortion which allowed also kind of
reverse a humanism to take place on the
right that the Protestants hadn't
particularly cared about proportion
until they noticed how much the Catholic
right wing cared about it was a
possibility of a coalition building
there and some Jews too and they like to
make nice with Jews especially the more
anti-semitic ones of them kind of
carrier pigeon Amin of the Apocalypse
there's many news to say about social
democracy we should support it as the
Rope supports the hanging man so the the
eschatological extremists of whom there
are quite a lot the premillennial
dispensation is the people who like
these end of times
NORs and the Left Behind series mmm-hmm
extremely pro-zionist and indeed very
much against even the smallest
concession on territory because they
need it for the earth for the Armageddon
but of course I think it's one in only
one in ten Jews are going to be spared
that but presumably they don't know
which ones they are so that's
that's when that's that's about the size
of it I think and then there's the other
one of course is some the attempt to
teach creationism in the school they
defeat they won't admit from all the way
back in the trenches but is the is that
is the bad thing the the rise in
religiosity itself or is it the rise for
example in eschatological thinking the
way in which this whole question of end
times and transcendental transcendental
things is brought into political life
mark I know you you wrote about this in
your book the stillborn god yeah well I
think part of this story that that no
one Christopher urban telling can be
filled out a bit by looking at you know
the simultaneous Great Awakening coming
out of the 60s self discovery on the one
hand and the other is the collapse of
all kinds of religious institutions that
at the same time there was a great
dieter Qing of America
so that people left mainline Protestant
churches left the Catholic Church found
themselves in new sorts of churches
intellectual figures that were religious
that commanded some authority in the
1950s and early 1960s you can name the
usual names down through Reinhold
Niebuhr and so on there's no one like
that out there right now so there's been
a tremendous dumbing down and
atomization of the religious why is it
that that the kind of de
institutionalisation of religious
feeling this increasing
individualization of it why should that
inevitably mean lower quality discourse
dumbing down because that's democracy
that's why that's what happens it
because well it has to do well it has to
do with the decline of the educational
institutions that produce ministers and
priests and rabbis in the past in
certain streams of Judaism on the one
hand and it also has to do with the
spirit out of the 60s I think becoming
that everyone should be able to pretty
much express himself and there's kind of
anti hierarchical sense intellectual
sense that infected theological of
discourse as well but wait
and I'll just mention one book worth
looking at one of the best books on this
was written by an evangelical maid mark
Noll which was called the things called
the closing of evangelical mind what he
complains about this from within and
sees the same things that all of us yeah
no I just I just wanted to just say that
alongside that though it's also true
that the institutions that produce
evangelical leadership which Knoll is
criticizing nevertheless were able to
create relatively least university
educated leadership the evangelical
movement in a way that hadn't
necessarily existed let's say among
early funded Christian fundamentalist
let's say at the time of the Scopes
Monkey Trial the Christopher was
mentioning so in fact relative to where
at least fundamentalism American
fundamentalist Christianity was in the
early part of the 20th century it
actually there's actually a substantial
improvement
there's success of colleges that were
small-town Bible colleges and they've
become Christian universities is a kind
of character trend no it doesn't mean
it's not a dumbing down if the kind the
mark is talking about it the very
highest level you don't have the sort of
towering theological figures let's say
in some some general way although
Stanley Horowitz might disagree with
that I'll give another instance that
might actually help us to bring it up to
the present day to the identification of
liberalism with them secularism it's on
it's contradictory in pardon also
materialized in part by the civil rights
movement which is liberalism is greatest
claim to moral authority and there's a
sort of penis envy you could almost say
among the white Presbyterian southern
time right wing that they can do it and
get praised for it in the newspapers and
work use to bring religion into politics
in fact therefore for we'll go ahead
start first by of course supporting
segregation in any case second by saying
that it wasn't for men of God to mix in
politics which was a step in forgotten
no totally forgotten all that but but
very easily looked up and then saying
actually guess what we can do this too
you're saying part it was a reaction
against the mobilization of conscience
on the left absolute for people on the
right to say well how you're the ones
who are monopolizing this on this
the following very bad consequence which
is that mainstream culture and society
and our great profession gives almost
axiomatic free pass to any black
politician didn't put the word river in
front of his name
thus Jesse Jackson say al Sharpton verse
are the religious businessmen and fraud
since shysters and now and now not an
outright the demagogue and paranoid
nutcase who's ruining the Obama campaign
but I take it as liberalism wasn't
paying attention
ah so but then who's condescending to
black Willie is that but is that big car
you saying then that the underlying
problem here in part is that liberalism
secular liberalism has it affected
afraid to speak its name and it's all
too willingly seed in the stage or seed
in the sense of superiority to
religiously based political that's part
of what I meant to say but I very very
particularly meant to say also that by
resting on the laurels of the nineteen
sixties of the heroic period of the
movement and of the apotheosis of that
in the form of dr. King's Exodus but no
what would you and my impression is you
would take a different view from
Christopher here because your problem
would be less with religiosity itself
then with what you would say our
political distortions or political
exploitation of religious feeling well
I'm actually skeptical of even talking
about them as exploitation because I
think that in all these cases you get a
sincere set of religious feelings that
are connected to a political view I mean
I think sincerity is is the marker in
all of these cases what I would have
said though in response to to
Christopher is that liberals actually
haven't really come to terms even after
the fact with the role of religion in
the civil rights movement that there's
actually profound discomfort among
secular liberals about the fact of Kings
religiousness and that that is depicted
I think in mainstream at least secular
liberal discourse as something that can
be minimized as though it were sort of
an attractive you know happy phenomenal
sort of superstructure layered on top of
the real thing which was the impulse to
justice which is described as something
that's perfectly available to secular
folk so when you hear people trying to
explain why religious discourse in the
public sphere is dangerous and then try
to deal with the fact that Kings
this course was profoundly religious
they say well it was universally
accessible wait everyone is anyone who
could agree with it
but if it's not obvious why that so if
that but if that is so then how is it
that figures like both Obama and Hillary
Clinton can increasingly close their
views and in explicitly religious
Christian language that's they're hardly
there there's no fear they're gonna
alienate secular liberals so I think
what's happened is that the last two
presidential campaigns 2000 and 2004
convinced enough secular liberals that
they better hold their noses and accept
this kind of rhetoric I think that's all
that's happened is in a pragmatic
accommodation I think it's much worse
than you say I mean there's been this
beautiful mark Tennessee on a section of
I'd rather say the left for me liberals
to indulge religiosity if it suits them
politically the instance we've just been
discussing is one liberation theology is
so-called the sounder needs to church
based communities the alleged the
preference of some of the Roman Catholic
Church for the poor all this kind thing
is is given a free pass though it's a
very debased form religiosity and
impiety but this you don't have to look
very far in left polemic and journalism
these days to see Islamism Islamic
jihadism
explained as a some sort of cry for help
from the wretched of the earth that's a
very very very common leftist miss
reading of the Islamist challenge that
kind of France final view of it it's a
generalization I think what's already
clear in the discussion so far is that
the title of today's conversation what
we believe ought to be interpreted in an
interesting way now what we believe
about God because that turns out not to
divide people what we believe about
people who believe hmm and that is what
is it that why is that the people hold
beliefs and in what way does it motivate
action so that's why the discomfort
around being is not a discomfort
I don't think about concepts and symbols
it's rather facing up to the fact that
this is a powerful motivator this is
something that got people out willing to
face physical danger in the name
justice if they're willing to do that
what else are they willing to do so it's
really for me the more interesting
question is this anthropological
question that I guess probably divides
the three of us that is why it is it why
is it that people get attached what
things are possible what you do about
that just is a fact about human beings
well so then I mean what you're thinking
of in part I think is the fact that
there are many noble activities that we
think of that would be unimaginable
without religious motivation as any is
that sort of a part of the premise of
what you're saying well that's right I
mean Noah's just published this book
that I think has something to teach us
as well about what we were talking about
with evangelicals what happens when you
have an Orthodox religious tradition
that breaks down and everyone becomes a
free elementary particle theologically
speaking not only does that change the
landscape intellectually and you see it
dumbing down but that there but that
people are motivated to do much more
extreme things in every direction so we
have a stake if we assume that there's a
fundamental Fiat rope ism in human
beings to encourage a kind of rational
orthodoxy and to treat that with respect
while at the same time resisting the
forces of action that can spin out when
these traditions dissolve Christopher is
there a fundamental theory ism in human
beings yes it must be so but it must
therefore be admitted just as equally
granted that form we now estimate
there's been some work done on this and
I'm a pretty no less than 10% of us
didn't have this are so made that we
cannot believe there's not that we don't
well we think the arguments against are
better it's just we couldn't you mean
it's a hard one to someone talk about
why they're a person of faith is white
noise to us okay that's a Pascal
addresses his Ponce's to the one who was
so made that he cannot believe if he
knew that there was such people but I
think that
it seems to be quite inescapable that
there's a there's a God need in a very
large number viewing its innate daniel
Janet's book breaking the spell is very
good on this and he as you know
postulates the idea or belief in belief
as being what's really going on people
think it's good if you do believe we
replicate this in our own discourse the
President and most politicians assume
that if you can say of someone it's that
he's a person of faith that's a that's a
compliment you're paying okay this
person is absolutely willing to believe
important things would never an incident
what could be more positive
he's Vladimir Putin gets a free ride
because he's wearing a crucifix when the
president meets I'm still in a strong
field probably the stupidest thing the
president is said no is that a
prejudicial account of faith on
Christopher's part or would you agree
with that well I'm not gonna buy into
the the hardwiring view only because I
just don't think there's we don't have
this sophistication yet I think in
whether we will s even itself an open
question to make those kind of judgments
about complex social beliefs the
relationship between hardwired and
complex notion beliefs is still it's a
desert autumn for the people who do you
know cognitive science but they're
they're nowhere near there yet no matter
what they sometimes tell you so I'm not
gonna take it take a crack at that but
what I will say is it's important not to
miss what they what someone like the
president means when he says so-and-so
as a person of faith it's not of course
the non-rational component of it
precisely that they're after there after
the idea that they think that if a
person is a person of faith he must have
moral commitments that he would not
violate even if it appeared that
particular circumstances guided him to
violate those commitments that's what
they're getting at they're getting at
the idea of a moral commitment that
would be sustained that I'm indebted to
Mark's analysis here that would be
sustained even if there were
circumstances that pushed against him
it's this idea that you can't really be
acting morally unless there's a really
bad reason that unless there's something
really pushing against you before name
you'll know this one of you will for you
all three of you will and I've forgotten
it the man who wrote Protestant Catholic
Jew the famous perfect
the will Herberger that's right we'll go
where he would seem to be emerging at
that point according this very then
successful book was that the the
national religion of the United States
was essentially a humanism and President
Eisenhower commenting on the reactionist
book said you know it's really important
the ready of every American should have
a faith belief in higher and I don't
care which one it is so it's very genial
very pluralistic you might say very
inclusive and rather soggy but
definitely there and refreshingly
non-sectarian yeah Nelson Rockefeller
used to talk about brotherhood of man
Fatherhood of God and so his religion
was referred to as bomb fog fog is now
gone to his aides with sometimes
sometimes fog bomb was but his aides
would say the bone fo bits just coming
out no in the one consequence of that I
think is that is especially since
cultural elites who don't know that much
about religious life and are trying to
catch up kind of miss the story is that
American religious people have been
secularized to a tremendous degree over
the past thirty years
hierarchy within the family attitudes
towards women attitudes towards race all
these things have changed a lot and so
there's got to also be a complex
relationship to the actual mainstreaming
the cultural mainstreaming of believers
in in this country at one level who are
living lives today people who attend
evangelical mega churches are living
lives that would have been seen to be
crazy and sinful by evangelicals in
that's intriguing why then is it if
that's so if in fact things that we
think of as being part of the 60s which
you also said earlier are in part
responsible for this third wave of
religiosity and yet it's political
valence is almost wholly conservative
how can that be if it's origins and so
in so many ways seem seem liberationist
and it's political violence seems
reactionary well because I think in part
from what Christopher was saying the
belief is in belief yeah and that
become the last read out after you are
no longer deriving the rules of the
family children sit at the end of the
table all kinds of hierarchy derived
from a religious tradition that becomes
the fetish and it becomes a highly
symbolized fetish that you have to
defend in relation to all these other
things in your life there's one other
thing which I think is at work here on
the political side that we really don't
like to talk about there really counts
as the dirty word in American political
life and it's class and you know you see
this in the way that the Senator Obama
had gotten got himself into trouble sort
of talking around the edges of a class
question and it's not here a question of
exact economic demographics because if
you run the demographics it turns out
that evangelicals don't look
particularly different from not
evangelicals in some general because
partly there's so many Americans call
themselves evangelicals that it's hard
to it was about 40 percent of the
country chefs between 30 and 40 percent
depend on who you ask so but that said
part of the political movement is a
sense of resentment and you doesn't have
to be called class resentment but it's
resentment don't say it just don't say
it bitter yeah exactly against people
who are too pelling ordinary folks what
they should believe and I think the
thing the Christopher mentioned about
the teaching of evolution in the schools
is a really good example of this where
the persistence of the desire to teach
what was first you know being called
creationism and then that the Supreme
Court struck that down that it was
creation science Supreme Court struck
that down intelligent design the lower
courts have struck that down in the the
persistence the desire to reinvent some
version of this comes in part I think
just from a resistant strand that says
we don't want people sitting in
universities to tell us what we think
what we ought to believe on fundamental
questions this should be some kind of a
local decision so it plays into the
language of localism it should be a
decision we make in accordance with our
beliefs the way is the is the big
default thing in this country this
secular academic culture against which
people are reacting or is the big
default thing in this country a highly
Christianized discourse which makes
non-believers feel marginalized can both
of those things be true at once yeah
yeah
that first thanks to the extreme
self-pity of the believers the feeling
that they are the feeling that they are
martyring themselves and also I think
sometimes you know the their remembrance
that you are supposed to be laughter
Canadian Christian so that it reinforces
their marks you said much but I mean
Stephen Carter friends doing something
for Calvary by making a bit of an idiot
of myself in a science classroom in
Dover Pennsylvania yeah absolutely what
they mean though in part is that there's
no I mean we passed this question how
can evangelicals feel disempowered when
they're 30 or 40 percent of the
population well
because of scenarios like this one right
how many evangelicals on this panel how
many evangelicals in the room right and
then there's this institution the New
York Times bestseller list example he's
never going to register the fact the
Left Behind series right out sells
everything that's on that right yes
looks like that right yeah which are
indeed them as anyone's ever tried them
there they are a degradation of the act
of reading they are published in book
form but this but a good yeah right mark
known I think a good measure a good
measure of what we've been talking about
and also the sense of withdrawal and
resistance is the homeschooling movement
yes and they're I would guess you and I
are in complete agreement I don't know
if no is but this is a real problem
there there are problems that aren't
such problems that is whether a crash is
up you know symbolic things that don't
actually change people's sense of the
rules of the game but when children are
being educated in their living rooms by
their parents taking part in no public
discussion even in a private school
about what the rules of the game are
what the rules of science are and so on
then we have real problems and so that
sense of withdrawal and atomization
reaches its extreme in homeschooling and
that for me is the real problem but
that's not a class issue or is it how to
say it's homeschooling an example of
this socioeconomically marginalized
group of folks who can't bear this
secular culture or that's actually
includes professional folks as well you
know that's the farm full of underage
virgins
tell homeschool when you would say
that's a kind of paradigmatic
faith-based community it's hard to
homeschool right somebody has to one or
both parents have to have the leisure to
be at home right so right in fact I
actually you know probably cuz I'm a
product of religious education and I
think that I don't not clear me that
home schooling is so much greater
deviation from the development of kind
of a mainstream discourse then then
religious education is for example I
mean mark that that formulation sounds
to me a little bit like the 19th century
criticism of Catholic education you know
it took people out of the mainstream and
therefore it shouldn't be supported by
the state and and so forth it was the
real it was being a real problem for
educators and throughout the 19th
century for best day for white
Protestant educators so my feeling about
that is that and the other feature you
see is that the homeschool movement is a
movement the sources that people are
reading are in fact not just written by
the parents at home they're purchased
online from people whom even Christian
would have to call booksellers and
they're you know there there's also lots
of contact and movement among the people
who you know the sports teams are just
the latest phenomenon that I think the
newspaper has reported on sports teams
made up of different homeschooled kids
because there is some impulse to
socialization but so mark your your
problem it sounds like which is
consistent through several things you
said is that institutions are not only
sort of socially stabilized and they're
actually in a way intellectually
uplifting and they create some kind of
social bonds so home schooling like
atomized churches disintegrates this
this kind of social glue yeah
in fact I something I wrote in The Times
magazine a couple years ago where I
mentioned in a phrase this is a problem
I you know my inbox just for the next
month was flooded with things from
homeschooling people and so I read their
literature and correspondent with them
and it's true as you say that in fact
it's it's all classes are involved in it
now but there seems to be an impulse to
depopulate the public school I was in
conversation with a woman in Georgia who
wrote to me to say that she's the head
of her homeschooling group in her town
and she pulled her kids out because they
were feeling religiously pressured in
the public
school and so a kind of impact has been
reached in this town this since we
cannot talk in the same place about all
sorts of issues we will all leave the
public school and we will all do this
privately all getting things online that
can't be good for anybody so there's a
kind of nostalgia maybe for an earlier
time when there was more social
solidarity because America was a place
where institutions held a power more
powerful and more powerful hold on
people including religious institutions
yeah because they have a way of bringing
people into the norm teaching them the
rules of the game and preventing people
you know the few nuts from spinning off
in in various interests this is part of
Martin Luther's objection to Catholicism
and the sixteenth I mean he was coming
as well there so there's the answer
okay but notice also that it notice also
that the the sort of picture of what the
world used to be like and it's in those
towns is not a picture of secularism to
do what Mark is talking about you have
to have a soft unofficial religion I
mean what they had was a soft unofficial
established process ISM in the public
schools and that was one of the tools
that was used to stop people from
spinning off and when secularism comes
in the six 50s and 60s and says this is
wrong you know these schools can't have
the Bible read these schools can't have
daily prayer because think of how
marginalizing that is to these small
numbers of the population who don't who
don't subscribe to these views at that
moment that this thing's things turn and
the schools start to become a place from
which the believer wants to withdraw it
was a very strange thing the other day
though goodness how many people here
picked open it but I have little friends
who did the Southern Baptist Convention
I think it was announced they were going
to boycott Disney they were just they
were just bored and depressed and
offended by this little show biz values
that were pervading everything and
everywhere and they said no boycott
boycott this giant corporation that some
organizing and corrupting what quite a
few friends who thought hey yeah so nice
try so but let's let's talk just as
there are many upscale liberal morally
very wrote abyss that's prepared to when
the viagra ad comes on
6:30 in the evening when the kids are
watching the wait a minute why do I have
to put up with this and and how would I
be able to register a complaint when
it's a giant media and entertainment
corporation wants it this way what
chance do i but that way my own children
well you know maybe bit less more
erosive ISM might be a good thing yeah
and I say good on them but what about
this sort of other piece of what you
just said which is that it is not
inevitable that religious motivation be
primarily an engine on the right and in
a way it's ironic mark even when you
would said before about its origins are
there signs in fact that we may already
have passed through the era in which
religiosity is almost automatically a
source of reaction and that now you see
religiously people of faith who feel
that the environment is also a religious
issue who feel that aids Africa is a
religious issue and maybe to some extent
we're already talking about a social
anachronism yeah
well certainly there are signs of that
and when here's reports about it I've
had a little contact with some of those
people a bit when my book came out I did
a lot of interviews on NPR and they were
only interested in one question which
was isn't it the case that there's no
essential difference between Osama bin
Laden and George Bush when I answered no
they cut to Morning Report and we're not
particularly interested in talking about
it anymore but it turns out that there
are radio stations advantage' local
radio stations where the people are
interested now in essentially divesting
from politics their argument is that
it's not that we're right or left
anymore if anything we're probably on
the right but we do think that this that
politics has become an idol that has
pushed out the fundamental gospel
message so I showed up on some of these
radio shows and they wanted to talk
about what really sit saves us from fear
is it Thomas Hobbes and the modern state
that prevents us from feeling fear and
having to lock our doors or is it what
Paul st. Paul says in Galatians about
being from hope and fear set free and we
end up having discussion about these
scriptural verse
intellectually serious much more
penetrating than the NPR reviews and
serious about re-centering the
evangelical movement on spiritual
matters and away from politics
altogether which would be going back to
the way things were before when quietism
was the norm among evangelicals I mean
the way that's a return to the norm I
suppose yeah
well nonetheless on a couple of things
that concern me very much and I'm sure
many others service here that would be
to table with only I cared in anyway
Darfur and the refugees from the famine
and turny crisis in North Korea the
people out there doing things about that
are almost all of them conservative
Gusterson has to be admitted yeah and
the same is true of the anti slavery in
90 people trafficking Nexus in Africa
it's it has to be allowed to stand to
their credit shouldn't we even say for
President Bush that it is not a
coincidence that he has done more in
terms of humanitarian and developmental
issues in Africa than any of his
predecessors and he himself would
ascribe that to Christian compassion
well except for I mean Bob Geldof is
Latino his says that with so many were
City by far the best American president
and so would bono bono would agree not
and who can possibly would take someone
who graduate but I would humbly I'm very
humbly registered scientist sent I think
the attempt to decouple aid from any
enterprise that involves teaching about
contraception is a great disservice it's
not as bad as the as the Vatican policy
that says well AIDS is bad but not as
bad as contraception but it's getting
along that way and that's a great
disfigurement I think of what's
otherwise been a very positive president
no you can't say other things malaria
for example or he's been very deeply
involved that doesn't that doesn't
figure I just wanted to say in response
to your point though about quietism I'm
not sure the quietism is the default
position for evangelical Christianity I
mean the Evangel Christian movement is
also central to the abolition of the
slave trade in Great Britain you know it
played a role as well and non-free the
role and the temperance movement in the
United States robbery and a progressive
movement it's progressive event and
for so it you know I just want to yeah
make the point that it's up and down you
know I mean there are times when the
imaginable Christianity is a major
political force and times when it fades
and I suspect that's that sort of
fluctuations not going to change
substantially I mean since back actually
to what we're talking about earlier this
question religious anthropology one of
the things that has to be said and
Christopher has just admitted is that
religious faith is one thing that puts
boots on the ground that if you need
someone to go to North Korea they're
gonna do it if it means getting medicine
to people in Africa they're actually
gonna do it it's not that just that they
hold the right views but it motivates
people to do things so the question that
has to be asked of those who are
promoting that's you know some fantasy
of a fully secular culture is fine all
your views will be right how will you
motivate action where people are
actually willing to make sacrifices for
the good and not simply write an
editorial or check off the right box in
the ballot or subscribe to the right
magazines well Christian that is
something that these societies can't
answer that that question is directed to
you you could add well the reason that
the CIA is a full of Mormons that's the
at least the Mormons insists that any
serious young person goes out as a
missionary learns another language in a
dangerous and hazardous environment
these fuel convey to make very good
human intelligence agents are so though
they have to disabuse themselves of a
couple of theological deformities I
think it I wondered also I wondered how
the moment underwear works out in some
of those climates the problem with
having this highly uniform panel here we
don't have any more scenes to answer
that let it be conceded this is this has
a lot more moral to it I would say a lot
more grit and integrity than the sort of
effect less moral equivalence
racketeering of so move on door halt but
so but I mean let's pursue that a little
bit because you would I mean I think the
upshot of your of your book is we would
all be much better off if we lived in a
wholly secular world in that wholly
secular world we
in fact would the the fuel come from
that mark was describing that has led to
the civil rights movement and led to
terrible things as well would you just
say better off the end to not have the
fuel in either direction no no to
website I mean on this of course it is
true that though they came to it
extremely late
there's no record of any Christian
protest against slavery anywhere in the
world because it was so much biblically
warranted and so the Mennonite petition
in Germantown Pennsylvania in the 17th
century before the United States after
that was practically nothing till till
garrison and it has to be remembered
that the justification for and support
for slavery was what was the good
Christian contribution the motto of the
Confederacy is day of indice a god is
worth and so forth they're going to
accept the one they have to accept the
other the American anti-slavery
societies membership was tended to be
made the other people I Benjamin
Franklin and Thomas Paine do not believe
and I don't think anyone would say they
had they had less moral fervor to them
than people who can pound a pulpit and
wave of holy text so in a way is sort of
the founding fathers one could answer
that question no excuse me we're not
going to run out of conviction when we
when we run out of people who think that
God speaks through them or speeds at all
no you have a similar or different view
of that no I think because there is
certainly right that there are plenty of
people with deep conviction who don't
see that conviction is coming from God
to me the relevant question is whether
we should be categorizing religion
primarily in terms of the theological
component of it say well religious
people those are the people who believe
something because they think God thought
thinks so and on the other hand are
people who believe things from their
secular or whether you think the right
division is people who just believe
things in nearly absolute terms whether
that impulse is a secular impulse or
what we would call religious impulse oh
I mean you know the deeply believing
communists for example if such still
exists which they probably don't but at
the time when they when they did in
large numbers does that should we be
characterizing that in our conversation
has yet another religion with all the
features and demerits of religion or so
we'd be characterizing that is something
distinct and different because the 20th
century presumably is the century and
absolutist non-religious beliefs even
more than it is the century of
absolutist
widgets beliefs religious those are the
ones that did the big things and in the
20th century and mostly the big bad
things
yeah but the case was what I said in my
book they are surrogate religions and is
a very strong I've been in North Korea
for example where the read the president
is a dead man Kim jong-il the Dear
Leader is only the head of the party in
the army
he's not the head of the head of the
state heather statuses dead father of
whom is a reincarnation
so I described North Korea as an
autocracy or a net rock recei Morlock
recei but burnt note though care feed
note it's only one short of a Trinity
and the only activity allowed to the
citizen is to be a member of the
congregation is to I used to wonder when
I was a kid and forced to attend
Christian ceremonies would heaven really
be what they promised namely eternal
praise and thanks it sounded like hell
to me well now I've seen what it's like
when you get up in the morning and you
go to bed at night all you do is all the
time say thank you groveling and forced
to love someone who only enough you also
fear so it couldn't be a more religious
state well so we are we are we then
saying that the real distinction is not
between religious and not religious but
between absolute and not absolute forms
of belief is that really the relevant
distinction we should be thinking about
no I mean because to be in with you know
as Thomas Hobbes reminded us the thing
that's different about religious belief
in it is it's not just your time on
earth that's at stake that throwing in
eternal life changes everything and so
the states are different and also
religion responds to questions that very
few ideologies can respond to however
noble it might have been to fight for
the victory of the working classes and
the revival of Russia after World War
two let's say that small potatoes
compared to a highly developed theology
that explains your place in the world
your place in eternity the role of
nature between you and God
it's simply a much richer answer and
also more powerful answer because and
it's not just because it gives you
virgins at the end it's that it actually
puts your action in another perspective
understand there's something that is
either - that can be both deeply
degrading and highly ennobling in that
depending how it's cast if it's simply
that you are a cog in the wheel you are
simply on your knees it is utterly
degrading to the human condition if on
the other hand it calls out of you the
best that is within you and allows a
kind of self mastery to overcome what's
loaning you then I think it has to be
admitted that there's something
ennobling in them and it's also
tremendously flexible I mean I think
that's the other point and this goes
back to what Christopher was saying
about people who try to explain the rise
of Islamism as though it were solely a
result of people being poor and
depressed the point is that the Islamist
movement is capacious enough to include
both the sincere religious belief and a
political component so that it appeals
to you know the children of the rich in
a plane in Egypt I - oh ah he has been
well-established family or some good
lungs from a super-rich family and also
to the poorest people and it offers them
a religious worldview and a political
worldview and a cause format for action
and the sort of recoiling from that that
is the secular reaction that says
there's a fundamental confusion here
that we need to be separating the
political sphere from the religious
sphere it just doesn't have resonance
for people who see these things as
working together so richly and
effectively and they have an advantage I
mean they have it's an advantage in
politics to be able to tell people -
what they're doing matters for the for
the ages and for eternity and it's an
advantage in religion I actually think
to be able to tell people that there are
things they can do in this world that
will have an effect the other worldly
religions that you know call for a
complete withdrawal from the world they
always there always be with us but they
tend to be smaller that's why I'm
surprised you argued against the idea
that people have this God shaped space
inside them it does seem to mean quite
clear that for most people the it's not
satisfying to say that you would do a
right action because the
there's a trade-off of in humans that
evolutionarily
self-selecting helps us to evolve that
we respect people who are willing to
sacrifice for the tribe and make
reciprocal gestures of goodness you want
you want to be able to say no you do it
for something more transcendent than
that you don't want just a utilitarian
calculus and that's I think incredibly
important also it's distantly related to
something that intrigues me very much
which is the extreme appeal of religion
to women in almost all countries and
cultures that women are more religious
than men and I have a feeling that
that's what is your a theory about
haven't got a theory about it well I do
have a theory that I think women women
are more superstitious than men because
of the possibility of losing the child
yes need to propitiate because they are
such a small thing can lead to such a
terrible disaster and maybe maybe know
any propitiation that might ward that
off is worth trying well I admit it's a
bit material by the way on the Virgin
point yes as people have studied Judaism
we'll know and as the Muslims will learn
but with every 72 virgins come 72
mothers in law finally an answer to that
in our so but let's let's spend the next
few minutes talking a little bit about
of that Islam because the way mark was
characterized in the difference between
religion that actually can serve a kind
of valuable public and social purpose
that is religion that that enables
individuals and the ones that are
ruinous those that that in effect compel
obeisance and the diminution of the
cells I think a large part of people's
fears about Islam even leaving aside
jihadists is that Islam tends towards
precisely that kind of self-abnegation
and therefore as it becomes politically
enabled what it enables is various forms
of authoritarianism is that is that a
stereotyped or prejudicial or
narrow-minded view of Islam itself
well I think it's a wrong view I don't
know if it's as other things forget the
I think it's wrong I mean you know so
Islam doesn't have a doctrine of
original sin doesn't think that people
are need needs salvia that the human
character fundamentally needs salvation
does think however that one ought to
live in submission to God on the grounds
that he is God so it's definitely a
religion that requires that sort of
obedience to divine sovereignty but in
those respects I think it's not so
fundamentally different from Judaism and
Christianity with which it's obviously
intimately related and you know the
Western fear from which it is pledged
arose to me well again only I think only
in the sense that you know any great
work of literature is plagiarize from
the earlier of great works of literature
I mean if you want to use that as the
general that the general form then fine
I don't object to the term but you know
what
you know it's as though I don't know
this happens to me all the time I'm
speaking in front of evangelical
audience and someone comes over to me
and they say listen you seem to have
some understanding of the scripture and
I I just don't understand why don't you
see that the prophecies of Isaiah are so
perfectly played out you know in you
know in the gospel and I say what I
entirely you know see what you mean just
might be that the person who wrote the
Gospels had read Isaiah so you know
and similarly in the Muslim world I'm
regularly asked a version of the same
question you know you seem to have you
know read these books and how can you
not have it so factors become a Muslim
you know one of the important Muslim
teachings is that the divinity of the
Quran is manifest just through its
beauty and to that there is no good
answer it turns out the only thing you
can politely say in the movement world
and everyone will let it go with this is
you could say it would make my parents
very sad if I became if you say that
everyone everyone understands the filial
piety comes ahead of anything anything
else that ends the conversation you
don't say the thing about the surgeries
and the mother's law do you yeah so so
but the reason that I that I'm making
this point is just that when we project
our fears onto Islam which we we do
which is not say there are things to be
afraid of the list of things that we
think we're afraid of often is not this
the actual set of things about which you
have great great concern I mean in the
case of the Muslim world today what's of
concern to me is that far and away the
most vital and lively movement in the
Muslim world is a movement that's
interested in combining politics and
religion and the reason for that is that
the secularists tendency let's just say
in certainly in the Arab world of Arab
nationalism is seen as having been a bit
of failure not that it was exclusively
secularists but it had a kind of
secularizing move you know Arab
nationalism was supposed to replace the
Islamic Ummah or community and when that
failed people said oh well let's go back
to the to the other thing so what's
worrisome is that you know we we in the
West have been on the side of the same
dictators who have failed and secularism
is now tarred with the brush of
autocracy and that's really that's an
extrordinary in the West be more overtly
supportive of movements like the Muslim
Brotherhood in Egypt well I don't know
about overly supportive because it end
up disagreeing on many many substantive
issues with the Muslim Brotherhood the
question is should to me is should we be
actively supporting governments that
suppress the Muslim Brotherhood like say
the government of Egypt and on that view
it seems to me that it's not it can't
possibly be the right strategy in the
long run from a self-interested
perspective and from a moral perspective
it also seems wrong to me because you're
not going to convince and you're not
you're not going to do good by putting
people in prison and torturing them and
expecting them to no longer be Muslim
brothers the Egyptian
has done that and one form another first
century and it's been a total failure so
we would either of you guys draw this
line in effect between forms of Islam
that we think can actually be socially
valuable in the end and forms which are
destructive well I think the important
thing to say that may either unite or
divide us is that it's very important to
distinguish planning from plan B plan a
wouldn't be wonderful if we woke up
tomorrow and we discovered liberal
democratic institutions separation
between public and private privatization
of religious belief in the Muslim world
one can accept that principle and say it
ain't going to happen it simply is not
going to happen what is your plan being
and I'm surprised by how many people I
talked to in debate have no plan B first
I need to convince them I'm with them on
plan a what do you do they're there and
they're staying not only there they're
here if you're talking in Europe so you
have a very very serious problem that
has to be addressed in the terms in
which it presents itself and that's why
I think we have in fact a large stake in
thinking about these questions and in
encouraging a lot of this is not going
to depend on us do we at least have to
have our heads straight about it this is
why the debate over tariq ramadhan
coming to the United States set off a a
very interesting little roman candle
from my point of view because it
revealed the difference between those
who want to think about Plan B and those
who don't and it's in part secularists
in the Middle East whom one has to be
willing then to say this to because
there's no one more hostile say to
organizations like the Muslim
Brotherhood then people who have fought
and shed blood for pure secular so there
you see a little bit of softening so the
leading Egyptian civil society
secularist is a man called sada Dean
Ibrahim who has definitely paid the
price in terms of spending time in
prison and so forth and he used to have
that view
but he's actually moved substantially I
think probably was being in prison with
the Muslim brother he says right yeah I
mean and I it seems that you know he has
a study more of a pragmatic you he's
thinking more in Plan B terms now but
he's a category of one in Egyptians
there is other people
he's a wonderful guy you know he's yeah
the restaurant myself well I think it's
worth just noticing that if you draw a
graph and plot it plot along it of
secularism in the Muslim world it's a
consistent finding that the more
separation of religion and politics
there is the happier more open more
prosperous to the country is that would
be true of Turkey of Tunisia of
Indonesia where's explicitly it is not
allowed for the mullahs to run politics
the Constitution forbids it
and where the no literal interpretation
of the Quran is allowed and respective
for example women's rights or the rights
of non-muslim minorities it's just easy
the more secure ISM the better we just
have to understand that that is it
always has to be plan a and how could it
be different and look at some if you
want to see how the proposition can be
tested draw a graph above the societies
that are the most development the most
under the rule of V of the but you're
partly talking about the Arab and
non-arab Islamic countries terrify
terrifying backwards and ok and this is
very important aggressive States they
they project their state failure into
rogue state conduct yes they can't blame
that they cannot blame their failure on
themselves it can't be because they've
tried to follow the Quran that their
children's teeth are falling out it must
be a Jewish Crusader conspiracy so the
violence must be pushed out to our
society which is why by the way our plan
B has to be and it we have to be ready
for it a clash of civilizations that's
Plan B it's coming and we'd better be
ready for it and we all say that our
civilization is worth fighting for
ok we haven't discussed what it is about
Islam that makes this unpleasant facts
so salient ok it isn't just that it's a
plagiarism of Judaism and Christianity
it plagiarism of the worst bits of these
two they just steal their pick and
choose the garbage stuff about Hellfire
and stoning and amputation punishments
they from Christianity they said virgin
birth yes Jesus probably not Son of God
because actually then there's some
paranoid nonsense about he someone else
was crucified in this place and the Jews
pulled some trick and so anti-semitism
riddles from all of this garbage and
drivel lifted at random from earlier
texts very sinister and always the worst
immersed in stolen thing and no
experience with Greek or Latin
civilization involved in this at all
none desert stuff so really free lousy
and then making the unbelievably
arrogant claim of final ISM it is the
last and final and unimprovable word of
god anything said after it is profane
redundant pitiful and unnecessary and
those of us who can be called which were
not Christians or Jews that's the only
exemptions they allow allowed to be
people of the book fortunate because we
are part of the great plagiarism this is
a form of condescension known in fact
and in practice as limited as you you'll
be tolerated when we take over the world
which we will do let me start by getting
closer away physically I declined to be
talked to in this terminal yes even by
moderate Muslims and you should decline
to be taught in that tone of voice also
those
so which parts do take exception if any
essentially every single every single
sentence there but let me start with let
me start with the most let me stop with
the most saline one which is this call
for the clash of civilizations and also
let me refer to this the fact that that
that particular of all of Christopher's
clever comments that's the one that got
the applause why because I think there's
this again this visceral instinct to
that the Muslim world is to be feared
and hated now some of it's a result
unquestionably of attacks of September
11th which actually happened right here
and we're look we're carried out by
people who did so in the name of Islam
so I don't mean to ignore that that fact
but so on the clash of civilizations
that can't be Plan B because it's not
connected to an actually existing
political reality there aren't in fact
countries in the Muslim world with the
capacity or at the country level the
interest engaging in this sort of a
global clash of civilizations Osama bin
Laden doesn't in fact have a country
behind him he has a you know a movement
of individuals who born themselves into
groups to perform terrorist attacks and
indeed most importantly of all you can't
have a clash of civilizations when the
civilizations are interpenetrated and
what Christopher calls plagiarism I call
in
integrated influence I mean mutual
influence so you know that that's on the
con the big clash socializations point
and then on the on the sort of
particular particular details you know
actually there's some terrible things
about Judaism and Christianity that are
absent in Islam you know they didn't
pick up every bad thing and there are
some very good things about Christianity
and Judaism that some other things and
then Islam has some other things that
are very good that are not products you
know are there would you say there are
enough in effect docking points between
Islam in the West that the idea of a
clash of civilizations actually is a
kind of unnecessarily apocalyptic thing
to fear yeah yeah I mean civilizations
aren't things that clash that's not I
mean the metaphors are just all wrong
they aren't self conscious entities you
do have flash points obviously but you
know we should also be aware that you
know even in religious political
relations within the West there's
tremendous variety let's remember that
that ministers in Germany are paid by
the state they are not paid by the state
in Spain you can wear a headscarf to
school and the Netherlands you cannot in
France religious schools are paid for
with state funds in Great Britain and in
Canada that's unconstitutional in the
United States we in the West do not have
one line on this we have ways of coping
with this problem and in Europe in
particular we have a new population that
it's difficult if not impossible to
fully incorporate in the foreseeable
future
into our understanding of liberal
democracy at a theoretical level so we
have to think of practical things that
allow us to get along that will slowly
change things but to think of even
ourselves as monolithic on this question
that's a mistake okay I want to yet we
certainly are not that we should be more
so give you design you just very brief
because then we have to go to questions
whether the afternoon newspaper in
Denmark is is well-known published some
satirical cartoons about
Mohamad the embassies of Denmark were
burnt in Muslim the capital of Muslim
countries where demonstrators are not
normally allowed Danish Linda's other
Scandinavian individuals were murdered
Danish economy was put under a very
devastating worldwide Muslim boycott and
the ambassador's of 24 countries went to
call upon the Prime Minister in
Copenhagen as a different type de marche
not representing Morocco Algeria
etcetera but religion 24 of them to
demand that he break his own law and
imposed censorship on the Danish press
if he's not allowed to do by the
national solution in their favor and no
no or no other country stood by them our
own didn't the State Department
condemned the cartoons
so that don't worry we're not unanimous
but don't worry increasingly they are
and that there's only one real division
in my mind it's between the people who
realize this and getting ready for a
first confrontation and those who
pretending is not happening well then
we're gonna start that and they're very
millennialist dispensationalist or
somebody else
Kristopher me I mean you know these
premillennial dispensationalists whom
you were you know making fun of earlier
I mean they their view sounds extremely
similar to yours there are two kinds of
people those who are getting ready for
the end of days and those who aren't
have a jewelry I don't think it's your
way okay I'm gonna stop here at this at
this moment so we're gonna have about 15
minutes for questions first I'm gonna
read a few questions that have come in
from the web and then we'll have at
least ten minutes or so for those of you
in the audience of questions their
microphones on either side so those of
you who do have questions please line up
and I'm sorry I'm sure we won't be able
to take all of them but we'll we'll do
our best so our first question which
comes from Taizo in Rio de Janeiro says
what is your take on the creationism
movement to teach both evolutionism and
creations at schools I suspect there's
not going to be a lot of difference of
opinion on this question is there any of
the three of you who actually thinks
there is a good argument for teaching
both evolutionism and creationism oh
absolutely I agree because I all I know
about the the evolution question comes
from studying the debate
first the debate between Bishop
Wilberforce and Thomas Huxley
mostly and second between Menken Darryl
and Bryan in Tennessee and I think that
that debate should certainly be taught I
don't think that they should say right
children biology class is over and now
we're going to do divinity class should
they keep the two of them it's like say
we'll have astronomy and then we'll
teach astrology no not-not-not
not to be taught in the science class no
but the argument to be talking
understood died electrically very much
so and for equal time because that's
what they're asking for and how
fair-minded could take that it will have
to be the case that any church that
takes any subsidy from the faith-based
initiative it has to devote most of its
time to teaching Darwinism Touche
anybody else have anything to add on
that no okay here's our second question
from Muhammad Ahmad in Egypt instead of
focusing the discussion on the very
limited reference of what we believe why
can't all concerned theists atheists
agnostics and so forth remain more
focused on the miracle of creation its
beauty its never-ending artistic
potential
that should be profound and intoxicating
enough for one lifetime if not numerous
lifetimes according to what one's belief
system is of course wouldn't you say
Noah
wouldn't you say I think it's a
beautiful statement it's a beautiful
statement another question
all right nothing to say on that okay
they were lovely questions though even
if they didn't provoke many answers now
okay so I see only one question so far
well that will let us get out early I
suppose please you haven't talked much
about the fact that in capitalist
countries where science and education
are spreading and answering the
questions and the skepticism and the
superstition that religion has become
less a factor and people there are fewer
people who are members of the church
isn't that admittedly a long way down
the track the answer to this problem no
because
the question is aren't the advances of
science by getting God out of the
sciences as an explanation that
eventually down the road can't we expect
to live in a world without religions
that fair enough
is having bad impact right in year
certainly in Europe and even among non
migrant communities here so if we
wouldn't capitalism is one of these
powerful destructive or creative
destructive forces like science itself
aren't these things essentially making
religion a marginal or irrelevant
essentially what you're talking about is
the disenchantment of the world the
world is no longer magical to us because
of all these forces because of what we
discover them because what we shape
ourselves right well no because science
cannot answer the question how did it
get that way because behind every
scientific explanation that gives you a
formula that gives you a date that gives
you an event you can always pose the
question well how did that happen and
how did that get there there is no end
to that long chain of questions it ended
so what that means is that in fact from
the point of view of religion divesting
from having to do magic can in fact
strengthen it in terms of simply
focusing on the questions that the human
mind unaided cannot answer would any of
you like to add anything to that well if
I could make a plea for a little
anthology that I've edited called the
portable atheist essential readings and
writings for the non-believer I would
say that the some of the best
refutations of original the best
negations of the religious world out
that were written long before darwin
long before einstein certainly long
before capitalism and technology and the
the materialization of so much of human
society if you want to find out how how
to argue against religion
go and read Lucretius all right sir
in iraq are we utilizing matters of
faith and moral authority to try and
help dampen the violence and leave
a more secular pluralistic civil society
behind is that everyone here that isn't
working in Iraq are we using faith in
effect to help produce a better more
effective society there I'm not entirely
sure what had to answer that but I mean
short answer is no we're not the plan a
of the US government folks in Iraq was
that Iraq could become a secular
constitutionally secular society and
that this would have the salutary
effects that your you're talking about
the problem was they also said that was
going to be a democracy which meant that
people would get to vote and once they
did in fact vote they elected
politicians who strongly supported the
idea that democracy and Islam should be
made compatible and should both be
incorporated into the constitutional
structure so that's what the
constitutional structure says it says
for better or worse
and it's not being implemented in
practice either way that the country is
democratic that there are regular rised
elections that there are guarantees of
equality for men and women of religious
liberty for all people and it also says
that justice Sharia is the fundamental
source of law that Islamic law can be
chosen by people for their family law
disputes and the tensions between these
two views and they're obviously profound
have not been worked out yet mostly
because the country is not being
governed in an effective effective
fashion if it were governed in an
effective fashion we would see these
tensions coming to the fore and possibly
pulling the country apart possibly being
resolved hard to know at this point
though well that's true and well put -
there's an exception to it which would
give an illustration of an earlier point
I made in the autonomous Kurdish
provinces in the north of the country
roughly 1/5 of the country the Kurdish
regional government which is also
mandated by the Iraqi Constitution this
does not apply the the mothers do not
rule the population votes for secular
leaders and parties and as a result it
is by every measure of distance enormous
ly more prosperous more free more
developed and more democratic than the
rest of the country because purely
because it's more sacred there isn't
even one coalition soldier there there's
no need for it
homogeneous though I mean the curtsy
sport they fought a terrible civil war
among themselves and once they resolve
that Civil War there's a secular side
spotters they've even stopped killing it
yeah I know and there are no car bombs
and suicide bombs all that caffeine that
you already get back among the
faith-based community the best answer to
the question was a headline in the
newspaper the onion which read war-torn
Middle East turns to religion for solace
oriental East is the premise of the
question also correct that we have
increasing secularism in the West
increasing fundamentalism in the Nam
West was one of those was one of the
formally patch takes is the importing
usually from the most backward parts of
the Muslim world from parts of the
mountains of North Africa and the tribal
areas of Pakistan for example into the
West bringing with them not just a very
very rugged and what's the word I'm
looking for fundamentalist version if
they're in religion but also things like
arranged marriages repeated marriages
between
cousins the areas of yorkshire now in
England where the Muslim population is
10 percent but it's 90% of the deformed
births because of the repeated in inward
marrying cousin upon cousin upon cousin
imported from backward areas of the rest
of the world and creating no-go areas in
almost every major city in Europe where
the police are afraid to go this is all
this is part of the cache itself and
it's being appealed to see as part of
the gorgeous multicultural mosaic that's
the form in which it's being infiltrated
and proposed that's the form in which
people who are reluctant to criticize it
or give it its right name you might say
something ok wait no that's the floor
which the Archbishop of Canterbury
proposes a good situation to it and the
imposition of Sharia law on England
without the fight well there will be a
fight no I don't think the
fundamentalism is on the wane in the
West we're we're a secular I mean the
United States at least I mean Europe's a
different story we're a secular sorry
we're a capitalist society is no
question about that and yet our religion
is is a significance and rising
significance I think still in our
politics so I would disagree on that
front well there's no question but I'm
just finishing other questions yeah the
two requests yeah and then with respect
to the the question of how Europe will
will cope with the things that
Christopher was referring to you know
III don't know I made extremely nervous
by a European discourse about different
people who were immigrating who are
somehow genetically inferior I mean you
know this is
this is a and when people are reticent
about this well this course that there a
greater I have not seen any statistics
with respect this is the first time I'm
hearing about this claim about to form
births in New York sure well maybe I'd
I'd be interested to hear about it but
it's not it's very far from being
outlying that statement is very far from
the outline from outline in the
contemporary center-right discourse of
Europe about the Muslim immigrants the
no-go zones in the cities as though that
were in the movie not the responsibility
not the responsibility of the state
authorities to enforce the law what
would you say in fact it's a West
perilous world and Christopher's making
it out to be there are many dangers in
our world but what I'm what is it yes
yeah yes I don't think that Europe is
about to enter into a clash of
civilizations either even inwardly I
don't know okay next question sir what
we've been doing that yeah in an hour
you just heard you must have it even you
even your question has become more
refined well certainly 400 people have
gone away edified but but isn't isn't
that a fair question that is to say it
should one despair of the possibility of
actually having a discourse with folks
with whom disagreements are so
fundamental that you would say talk is
gonna be futile I'm not even sure
discourse you know between sizes and we
simply have to understand more about the
phenomenon and look it straight in the
face I have to say that on this question
of what contemporary Europe is like I
side a little more with Christopher than
with Noah here that although I'm for a
plan B that tries to encourage things
within the Muslim world that will
moderate it I think at the same time
impact part of the motivation is looking
at the real gaps and conflicts that are
there in Europe now that does have to be
phased but it has to be faced not
through a gesture and not through a
rhetorical gesture that makes us feel
that yet again we have you know a bunker
to go into and yet again we have a fight
to fight but that we actually understand
and the Sociology the situation where
the flash points are exactly what people
believe in how malleable that okay next
question
oh look I had a friend that's now dead
I'm professor Israel shocked with his
name he was a professor of chemistry
that Hebrew University in Jerusalem and
chairman of the Israeli League for human
and civil rights and he thought the main
problem in Israel was the the the main
fault line was the struggle between the
secular and the Haredi the Orthodox and
that this was also the key so it was the
wood that would be the key to
dissolution with the Palestinians also
and I used to ring him up when I didn't
go visit him my ring and saying how
things going with this struggle that he
would save her there are some
encouraging signs of polarization and I
remember thinking how very nice that was
because in a culture like ours are
saturated with the idea that if you're a
unifier whatever garbage you're talking
is okay and if you want if you want to
say something critical or awkward you
can be accused of being divisive which
must be by definition horrible that
someone would say no no excuse me the
only progress that's made this is an
awesome to the previous gentleman's
question as well in any argument or any
discussion is by confrontation that's
there's a dialectical phone people say
oh let's have less heat and more life
fatuously there is only one source of
light happens to be I'm not much used to
you in a military confrontation though
I'd be willing to bear arms in US and
that's not what it's going to hinge on I
want people to make as sharp as possible
a distinction between themselves and
Crete being soft the Opera translation
of their society and the ones who make
excuses for it I want this to become a
much tougher harder argument okay let's
let's have one to do my bit in that way
one last question
I am sort of flattening of the world I
mean do you think that our ability to
understand each other to have an
awareness more cross-cultural awareness
religious awareness cross culturally is
ultimately going to lead to more
understanding or to more divisive this
is that a question which any of you will
the premise that seems to be that
changes in technology are helping us to
confront each other and understand each
other and I reject the premise rather it
gives us a superficial sense of
understanding something if we can click
on a mouse and see a website and I think
lessons the sense of the real cultural
and intellectual divides between
cultures or nations that are based on a
political theology and don't those that
are not so on the contrary I worry that
we know less because of all this or I
guess we have time for one more in fact
was TS Eliot says it's in courses from
the rock where is the knowledge we've
lost an information can you talk a bit
more about how religion and the
discussion of religion can be used as a
mask for more social problems such as
immigration in in France and poverty and
Turkey and the military coos that have
been going on there for the latter half
of the 20th century and and how may be
talking about religious not always the
solution to the problem but rather a way
to avoid talking about yeah why I think
I agreed that in part I mean take the
riots in France a couple of summers ago
many efforts were made especially
outside of France by people to say you
see this is young Muslim men writing
here comes the clash but in fact what
was notable about it is that for all of
the writing the discontent the the bad
behavior and the states slow reaction to
it there was no successful consolidation
of anything Islamic about it the
fundamentalist had no impact on the
riders it turned out to be a rather
familiar form of disenfranchise poor
people angry and writing to no great end
things
these things tenant tend to be and I
think that that's an example that shows
you in part that to say you know there
are Muslims in France who are angry or
that there's crime associated with
Muslim areas has got in some ways little
to do with the particular religious
beliefs or the content of the religious
beliefs of the people who are angry
that's that's just one example of that
of that phenomenon I the in an almost
apotropaic way these way very written up
especially in the new york times of
business as protests by disillusioned
and demoralized youth right the
suggestion being maybe there aren't
enough sports clubs in their
neighborhood and listen i think well i
have to pay what about the jobs yet then
maybe unemployment to sit naturally for
unemployed why not go and set fire to a
lot of cars that'll get you a job no
there was no if it's youth i have two
questions for you why were the no girls
it's exclusively young man taking part
in this youth protest second do you know
anyone who tried to build cover those
demonstrations wearing a beanie we're a
young if you thought it was if you
thought it was religion neutral put on
your yarmulke and do with your notebook
and trying to pin them just try that i
ask any french jews what they would feel
taking a day trip to one of those
bonilla yeah go on ask them yeah well
here it i have us them i know what the
answer here i have to cite it again with
christopher but was slightly different
reason that is that you know that the
thrust of the question was aren't there
other social causes too many of these
problems but it may be the case that
once people turn to religion in the face
of these problems that religion itself
becomes a problem as well and it is not
the case that if somehow tomorrow
everyone was to be delivered a car a
Pujol in the banya and a job that
somehow that appeal would stop this
thing takes on a force of its own and
all the more reason to be worried about
it and treat it subtly when it happens
Islamism jihadism is not the products
with poverty and unemployment it is the
cause of it it aims to cause it do the
national income of indonesia it was
brought down by a full point
by two or three bombs in the
full-employment economy of the barley
all right we have to start we have to
start that's by design
okay good to stop at that point thank
you so much